As soon as a camera is involved, the nature of a dive changes. To what degree this changes depends on the photographers motivations and photography goals. Passionate photographers consider a dive successful only when they get a good image. Others approach a dive with a more relaxed attitude and may be satisfied even if the memory card is still empty when its over. Divers have to decide for themselves how important photography will be during a dive. The more time you spend under water with your camera, and the more dis- cipline you exercise in searching for new subjects, the more your photographic results will improve. Sunrise and sunset produce particularly attractive lighting in photos; both on land and under water. Twilight produces a world of magic below the sur- face because the shadowy light looks much different than the harsh light of midday. Anyone who is not willing to miss dinner or head out before breakfast will never experience these conditions. Theres really no excuse for going on a dive without your camera because you will always find something worth photographing. In the same way that you might anticipate the type of lens youll want to use before you get in the water, you should also anticipate what opportunities might develop while you work. For example, after you finish shooting a backlit image, immediately reset your camera settings for a standard exposure so youll be ready for whatevers next. Its better to reset your cam- era too often than to miss a great shot because you didnt have time to change the aperture, shutter speed, ISO, and flash in the heat of the moment. Making a plan for what you intend to shoot before you go on a dive can be an effective way to focus on specific subjects. If making plans isnt feasible, then its important to continu- ally distinguish worthwhile subjects from oth- ers with less merit while youre under water. A change of perspective can work wonders, which is why its critical to have a sense of how subjects will look in the final image. Evaluat- ing subjects this way makes it much easier to decide what to photograph. For example, you might debate which situation will produce the image you want: diving down 130 ft to photograph coral with a very dark background, or swimming a bit farther in search of another speci- men thats in shallower water and brighter light. Dont get too set on capturing a particular subject if its not likely that your image will be successful. A particular shot may not pan out for lots of reasons. It may be the perspective or the flash settings, or it could simply be that the subject has disappeared. In situations like this, its best to forgo the opportu- nity and swim on in search of a subject with more potential. You need a lot of patience when you approach a shy animal, such as a blenny. You may need 30 to 45 minutes to get the shot you want, which re- quires a lot of perseverance from you and your safety partner. But this ap- proach is exactly whats called for when you want an exceptional photo rather than just a passable one. Take only as many pictures as you absolutely need because a lot of animals are highly sensitive to light. Spending time with an animal and waiting for just the right moment is significantly more gentle for both the wildlife and your memory card.  When you add accessories to your underwater housing, make sure you can still evaluate the image area on your cameras LCD monitor. Otherwise youll miss out on subjects that disappear before you can properly sight them in the viewfinder. As a rule, it is critical to honor the environment when you are in the water. No photo is worth breaking off a piece of coral, even if it can eventually grow back. Dont get lost in the photo-pay attention to whats around you. Divers should be perfectly balanced so they can avoid causing damage to the under- sea environment. Mastering an effective fin technique is key for preventing debris and other floating particles from clouding the waters around you. What good is it to have the chance to photograph a fascinating control panel at a shipwreck site only to end up with a murky fog? Respecting the environment will help you produce quality images. Dont stress yourself. Bringing back one or two good pictures from a dive is totally enough and is better than having 20 images saved on the memory card that are only average. When we are under water, our eyes perceive our sur- roundings as colorful and vivid, yet underwater photos seem rather bluish and dull. Why is that? The human mind interprets missing colors so well that it subcon- sciously fills in colors for us. This is why the colors in a photo dont always live up to the colors we see dur- ing a dive. Artificial lighting, in the form of strobes and lamps, is critical for achieving brilliant, natural- looking colors in your images. Just a few feet below the surface of water the color spectrum starts to diminish. At 10 ft in depth, red wavelengths of light are filtered out, orange is lost at 30 ft, yellow at 100 ft, and green at 130 ft. Only blue wavelengths penetrate to 500 ft, and at 1,000 ft no color is visible. Because red wavelengths penetrate only 10 ft under water, you need to be within 5 ft of your subject; light first travels from the light source to the subject, and then from the subject to your camera. At greater distances red wavelengths fall away steeply until there is no red at all. The intensity of sunlight is dramatically reduced when it hits the surface of water-at 30 ft its already decreased by 80 percent. If the water is cloudy, the loss of color brilliance and light intensity is even more dramatic. To counteract this problem, increase your ISO so you can keep your shutter speed fast enough to avoid blurry images. Refraction is another property of light that affects underwater photography. It causes rays of light to change angle after they penetrate the surface of water. If you see a stick in the water, it looks like its at a different angle under water, and the submerged portion looks bigger. The human eye experiences an opti- cal shortening when you look through water, and everything seems about a third closer than it actually is. This phenomenon has a significant impact on how far you should position your flash from an underwater subject. Strobes that are too close to the subject can overexpose the scene. If they are too far, the image probably wont come out as good it could be. Snapshots serve their purpose, but if you want consistently good results you need to thoroughly understand the interplay of aperture, shutter speed and light sensitivity (ISO). Automatic exposure modes are counterproductive under water because they often result in poor exposures. Because the aquatic world is relatively dark, automatic modes overcompensate and frequently produce images that are too bright. Serious photographers should use the manual (M) exposure setting to maintain full control over the aperture, shutter speed, and ISO. This is a fantastic way to accelerate If the shutter speed is too fast, the flash light may never reach the sensor. Most DSLRs have sync speeds between 1/200 second and 1/250 second. The ISO value defines the sensors light sensitivity. Low ISO values (e.g., 100 or 200) produce the best image quality; higher ISO values may result in digital image noise similar to graininess you might see in film images. Modern DSLRs tend to have excellent ISO performance and produce great results at ISOs as high as 800. Even when you shoot at ISO 3200, the image is often acceptable for online use. Its better to use a high ISO than to entirely miss a shot. Test your cameras performance by taking a series of images with increas- ingly higher ISO settings. Take the series of images in the dark, then view the results at 100 percent magnification and look for image noise. After you perform this exercise, youll have a good idea of your cameras maximum ac- ceptable ISO speed. Its important to understand that a proper combination of aperture, shutter speed, and ISO is what establishes a correct exposure. Imagine three test tubes with liquid in them. The total volume cant change, so if fluid is taken from one tube, it must be placed in another so the sum stays constant. In photographic terms, it works like this: If the aperture number is increased one stop from f/8 to f/11, the duration of the exposure must also increase by one stop, from 1/125 second to 1/60 second. Alternatively, the ISO value could be raised from 100 to 200. Many combinations are possible to allow the sensor to receive the same quantity of light. A good white balance reading is essential for accurate colors. It is given as a color temperature, which is measured on the Kelvin (K) scale. An inaccurate white balance reading can result in images that look too cold (blue) or too warm (red or sometimes green). When you choose the automatic white bal- ance (AWB) option, the camera attempts to gauge the color temperature on its own. Most DSLRs feature various preset white balance options that correspond to specific shooting circumstances. These presets help you choose an accurate color temperature in certain circumstances, such as when you shoot under florescent lights. Unfortunately, there is no preset white balance option for shooting under water, which leaves you with three choices: using AWB, setting your camera to a specific color temperature, or taking a white balance reading. To take a white balance reading, you need either a white or a neutral light gray surface so your camera can measure the temperature of the ambient light in the scene. You can use a white or gray card, the back of your hand, a com- pressed air cylinder, or a light spot of sand. Check your camera users manual for how to manually set the white balance; the process varies from model to model. You need to take a new reading every time you dive to a new depth because moving up or down will result in a change of the ambient color tem- perature. Any artificial strobes or lamps that youll use for your shot should be turned off; if they fire, the light they emit will interfere with the white balance reading. Manually setting the white balance can be time consuming, ideally done while shooting a stationary object, like a shipwreck. Setting a specific color temperature is practical in situations that arent predictable and for quickly moving subjects. Its often useful to choose a color temperature of 5200 K when you shoot with strobes that produce warm light at 4800 K. This combination results in a warm foreground and allows the wa- ter in the background to retain an attractive blue hue. The best way to figure out the ideal temperature for your particular camera-flash combination is to conduct a bracketing test at every multiple of 100 between 4500 and 5500 K. Then examine the results and decide which setting looks best. If you shoot in RAW format, both the white balance and the color tempera- ture can be adjusted later in an image-editing program. But it should be every photographers goal to capture a picture as ideally as possible in-camera to minimize the number of corrections that will be required later. 